Implement an OH2 EnOcean binding (Closes #2261) (#3826)
openhab/openhab2-addons: addons/binding/org.openhab.binding.enocean/README.md

# EnOcean Binding

> The EnOcean binding connects OpenHab to the EnOcean ecosystem.

Author: Should be solved now

> The binding uses an EnOcean gateway to retrieve sensor data and control actuators. For _bidirectional_ actuators it is even possible to update the OpenHab item state if the actuator gets modified outside of OpenHab.

Author: Should be solved now

## Supported Things

This binding is developed on and tested with the following things

 * USB300 and EnOceanPi gateways as OpenHab bridges
 * The following Eltako actuators:
    * FSR14 (light switch)
    * FSB14 (rollershutter)
    * FUD14 (dimmer)
    * FSSA-230V (smart plug)
 * The following Opus actuators:
    * GN-A-R12V-SR-4 (light)
    * GN-A-R12V-MF-2 (light)
    * GN-A-R12V-LZ/UD (dimmer)
    * GN-A-R12V-JRG-2 (rollershutter)
    * GN-A-U230V-JRG (rollershutter)
    * OPUS-FUNK PLUS Jalousieaktor 1fach UP (rollershutter)
    * OPUS-Funk PLUS Steckdosenleiste (smart multiple socket)
 * NodOn Smart Plug (ASP-2-1-10), In Wall Switch (SIN-2-2-00, SIN-2-1-0x), Permundo PSC234 (smart plug with metering)
 * Thermokon SR04 room control
 * Hoppe SecuSignal window handles
 * Rocker switches (NodOn, Eltako FT55 etc)

> However because of the standardized EnOcean protocol it is more important which EEP this binding supports: F6-02, F6-10, D5-00, A5-10, A5-38 (switching and dimming), A5-37 (use generic things). Hence if your device supports one of these EEPs the chances are good that your device is also supported by this binding.

Reviewer: You should provide a table with the exact thing type ids and their description.

Author: fixed

### Actuators
 
If the actuator supports UTE teach-ins, the corresponding thing can be created and paired automatically. First you have to start the discovery scan for this binding in PaperUI. Then press the teach-in button of the actuator. 

If the actuator does not support UTE teach-ins, you have to create, configure and choose the right EEP of the thing manually. It is important to link the teach-in channel of this thing. Afterwards you have to activate the pairing mode of the actuator. Then switch on the teach-in item(/channel) to send a teach-in message to the actuator. If the pairing was successful, you can control the actuator and unlink the teach-in channel.

## Adding Enocean-Things (Actuators, Switches, Sensors, etc.)

https://github.com/fruggy83/enocean/wiki#how-to-add-an-enocean-thing-actuator-sensor-wallswitch-etc-via-paperui

## Thing Configuration

> Things can and should by configured through PaperUI. Following the most important config parameters:

Author: I updated the documentation regarding this point. Using PaperUI is particularly needed for the pairing process. However after pairing is done, you are able to configure your things in files.

Just a side note: I think that parameters with multiple options cannot be set in the thing file (see [#6146](https://github.com/eclipse/smarthome/issues/6146)). Implemented a workaround for this in my binding, but should be solved in ESH.

> Things can and should by configured through PaperUI. Following the most important config parameters:

Reviewer: Please correct "PaperUI" to "Paper UI".

> Using PaperUI is particularly needed for the pairing process.

Ok, understood for the devices that need pairing - but if I am not mistaken, most sensors (without security) do not require a pairing process, so you should formulate it in a way so that it is clear that it is only relevant for pairing; probably best to have a dedicated section on pairing and leave the "thing configuration" section independent of whether DSLs or UIs are used.

Bridge

>  * Serial port: The serial port to which the EnOcean gateway is connected to

Reviewer: You also define a tcpBridge, this should be mentioned here as well.

>  * Serial port: The serial port to which the EnOcean gateway is connected to

Author: fixed, tcpBridge could be removed

>  * Next device id: The device Id which should be taken for the next created actuator without an explicit device Id

Author: I updated the doc, hope this makes things clear

 
Things

>  * Thing Id: EnOcean Id of the device. 4 byte hex string (abcdef00).

Author: fixed

 * Bridge: Must be provided
 * Sender Id: Is used to generate the unique EnOcean device Id for sending messages (added to the base Id of the gateway). If you leave it empty, the next free Id will be determined automatically (see "next device id" of bridge). The resulting device Id can be seen through the properties.
 * (Sending/receiving) EEP: Set the EEP which should be used to send and receive message to or from the device.
 
## Generic Things

  If an Enocean device uses an unsupported EEP or _A5-3F-7F_, you have to create a generice thing. Generic things support all generic channels like switch, number, string etc. However you have to specify how to convert the Enocean messages from the thing into Openhab state updates and how to convert the Openhab commands into Enocean messages. These conversion functions can be defined with the help of transformation functions like MAP or JavaScript.

For an inbound transformation (Enocean message => Openhab state) you get the channel id and the Enocean data seperated by a pipe.

```

> ChannelId|EnoceanData(Hex)=OpenhabState|Value

Reviewer: This isn't clear to me.  Where is this information entered?

Author: I am using the transform functionality of openHAB in this case. So you have to enter these information in files and put them into the transform folder of openHAB. Updated the doc regarding this point.

genericLightSwitch|70=OnOffType|ON
genericLightSwitch|50=OnOffType|OFF
```

Outbound transformation (Openhab command => Enocean message):

```
ChannelId|OpenhabCommand=EnoceanData(Hex)
genericLightSwitch|ON=01000009
genericLightSwitch|OFF=01000008
```

## Channels

> The channels of a thing are determined automatically based on the choosen EEP. The following channels are supported: (Light) Switch, Dimmer, Rollershutter, Temperature, Handle state and many more.

Reviewer: Here as well: Please provide a table of all channes here and list, which thing type has which channels.

Author: fixed

## Profiles

The (sensor) rocker switches use _system:rawrocker_ channels. So they trigger _DIR1[/2]_\__PRESSED_ and DIR1[/2]_\__RELEASED_ events. You can use these events in your rules

```
rule "Sonos ON"
when
    Channel 'enocean:rockerSwitch:4326d3ef:ffffffff:rockerswitchB' triggered DIR1_PRESSED
then
    Sonos_Bad_Control.sendCommand("PLAY")
end

rule "Sonos OFF"
when
    Channel 'enocean:rockerSwitch:4326d3ef:ffffffff:rockerswitchB' triggered DIR2_PRESSED
then
    Sonos_Bad_Control.sendCommand("PAUSE")
end
```

or link them directly to your items. The following items are supported by profiles: switch, dimmer, player.

> 

Reviewer: Please add a "Full Example" section (see other bindings)

Author: fixed

If the EEP of the actuator is known, the binding sends an UTE teach-in response with a new SenderId and creates a new thing with its channels. 

If the actuator does not support UTE teach-ins, you have to create, configure and choose the right EEP of the thing manually.
It is important to link the teach-in channel of this thing to a switch item.
Afterwards you have to **activate the pairing mode of the actuator**.
Then switch on the teach-in item to send a teach-in message to the actuator.
If the pairing was successful, you can control the actuator and unlink the teach-in channel now.
The content of this teach-in message is device specific and can be configured through the teach-in channel.

To pair a classicDevice with an EnOcean device, you first have to activate the pairing mode of the actuator.
Then switch the virtualRockerSwitchA On/Off.

Each EnOcean gateway supports 127 unique SenderIds.
The SenderId of a thing can be set manually or determined automatically by the binding.
In case of an UTE teach-in the next unused SenderId is taken automatically.
To set this SenderId to a specific one, you have to use the nextSenderId parameter of your gateway.

## Thing Configuration

> The pairing process of an openHAB thing and an EnOcean device has to be triggered within PaperUI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pairing process of an openHAB thing and an EnOcean device has to be triggered within Paper UI.
```

Author: fixed

> Therefore if you do not want to use PaperUI, a mixed mode configuration approach has to be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore if you do not want to use Paper UI, a mixed mode configuration approach has to be done.
```

Author: fixed

You have to define the transformationType (e.g. MAP) and transformationFunction (e.g. for MAP: file name of mapping file) for each of these channels. 

For an inbound transformation (EnOcean message => openHAB state) you receive the channel id and the EnOcean data in hex separated by a pipe.
Your transformation function has to return the openHAB State type and value separated by a pipe.
If you want to use a mapping transformation, your mapping file has to look like this for a genericThing using EEP F6_FF_FF:

```
ChannelId|EnoceanData(Hex)=OpenhabState|Value
genericSwitch|70=OnOffType|ON
genericSwitch|50=OnOffType|OFF
genericRollershutter|70=PercentType|0
genericRollershutter|50=PercentType|100
```

For an outbound transformation (openHAB command => EnOcean message) you receive the channel id and the command separated by a pipe.
Your transformation function has to return the payload of the EnOcean message.
You do not have to worry about CRC and header data.
If you want to use a mapping transformation, your mapping file has to look like this for a genericThing using EEP A5_FF_FF:

```

> ChannelId|OpenhabCommand=EnoceanData(Hex)

Reviewer: OpenhabCommand -> openHABCommand

Author: fixed
